+++
# Copyright (c) godot-rust; Bromeon and contributors.
# This Source Code Form is subject to the terms of the Mozilla Public
# License, v. 2.0. If a copy of the MPL was not distributed with this
# file, You can obtain one at https://mozilla.org/MPL/2.0/.

title = "May 2025 dev update"
authors = ["Bromeon"]

[extra]
summary = "v0.3: typed signals, async!"
tags = ["dev-update"]
+++

godot-rust is ready for summer, with its fresh **v0.3** release! This update introduces a few major features, sprinkled with a ton of smaller 
improvements.


## Typed signals

**Signals** are a core mechanism in Godot's architecture, enabling the Observer pattern for communication between objects.

One problem with signals in GDScript is that they aren't type-checked. Even if you declare them as `signal damage_taken(amount: int)`, this is
only informational -- the number and types of arguments aren't verified by the signal[^gdscript-checks].

Rust, being a language with a focus on safety and robustness, has no excuse to not do this better. So, if you write this...

```rs
#[signal]
fn damage_taken(amount: i32);
```

...you can now do all of this cool stuff:

```rs
// Somewhere in your inherent impl:
fn on_damage_taken(&mut self, amount: i32) {
    // ...
}

// Your setup code:
fn ready(&mut self) {
    // Connect signal to the method:
    self.signals().damage_taken().connect(Self::on_damage_taken);
    
    // Or to an ad-hoc closure:
    self.signals().damage_taken().connect(|amount| {
        println!("Damage taken: {}", amount);
    });
    
    // Or to a method of another object:
    let stats: Gd<Stats>;
    self.signals().damage_taken().connect_other(&stats, |stats, amount| {
        stats.update_total_damage(amount);
    });
}
```

Of course, you can also emit the signal in a type-safe way:

```rs
self.signals().damage_taken().emit(42);
```

If you change your `#[signal]` declaration, all the `connect` and `emit` call sites will no longer compile, until you update them.
Fearless refactoring!

For an in-depth tutorial, check out the [Signals chapter in the book][book-signals].

The signal system took several months to evolve and went through many iterations of going back to the drawing board, in
[more than 15 pull requests][changelog]. Special thanks to Houtamelo and Yarwin for going through trait and macro hell to make the
fluent APIs more user-friendly, as well as the many users who gave feedback during the initial design phase. The API will keep evolving!


## Async/await

v0.3 is the first version to introduce the **async/await** paradigm, thanks to the work of TitanNano in [#1043].

Asynchronous programming is provided through signals, which can be _awaited_ in a non-blocking way. This follows the idea of GDScript's own
`await` keyword.

To follow the above example with the `damage_taken` signal, you can now spawn an async task that waits for the signal to be emitted:

```rs
let player: Gd<Player> = ...;
godot::task::spawn(async move {
    godot_print!("Wait for damage to occur...");

    // Emitted arguments can be fetched in tuple form.
    // If the signal has no parameters, you don't need `let`.
    let (dmg,) = player.signals().damage_taken().to_future().await;

    godot_print!("Player took {dmg} damage.");
});
```


## `OnEditor` -- fields initialized in the Godot editor

We already have `OnReady<T>` to allow late initialization of fields during `ready()`. The new [`OnEditor<T>`][api-oneditor] struct extends this
idea to fields that cannot be initialized in neither the `init()` constructor nor a `ready()` method, but instead need to be set externally 
in the Godot editor.

In particular, using `Gd<T>` with `#[export]` consistently caused problems with initialization, and is now substituted by `OnEditor<Gd<T>>`.


## Interface traits + final classes

Interface traits like `INode3D`, `IResource` etc. have been ubiquitous in godot-rust. You come across them whenever you implement a constructor 
or override virtual functions. Incidentally, we found that 118 of these traits were effectively dead code, because Godot doesn't allow inheriting 
their respective classes. Examples include `IFileAccess`, `IIp`, `IScript` and many more. We removed them all, thus moving runtime errors to
compile time.

Additionally, non-inheritable classes in Godot are now properly marked as such in the docs, we currently use the term "final class" for this.
There are now descriptive compile-time errors when attempting `#[class(base = FileAccess)]`.


## Usability

`process()` and `physics_process()` both require a `delta: f64` parameter. Many Godot APIs (sound, timers, etc.) use `f64`, while many others
(vectors, matrices, etc.) use `f32` in default builds. This caused minor but steady friction with extra `as` casts.
Now, you can **additionally** override `process()` and `physics_process()` with `delta: f32`. This is transparently converted from `f64` by the
proc-macro. Details are available in [#1110].

`bind()` and `bind_mut()` have caused lots of runtime borrow errors. Fear not: they will keep doing exactly that. However, with 
`RUST_BACKTRACE=1`, you can now retrieve the exact call stacks where the problem occurs. Not just once it panics, but retroactively where
the previous borrow originated! Check out [#1094].

String types (`GString`, `StringName`, `NodePath`) now support loading from `&[u8]` and `&CStr`, with specified text encoding.
This bridges the gap to low-level GDExtension APIs, with additional validation on top.

When loading resources into fields, there is a new attribute `#[init(load = "PATH")]`, which calls `OnReady::from_loaded()`,
which again calls `load()` and stores the result in the `OnReady`.

Generated docs for the editor now support `@experimental` and `@deprecated` attributes, and will be displayed as such in the Godot editor.


## Project structure improvements

Examples were moved into a separate repo [demo-projects], with their own issue management and continuous integration.

API docs now mention (again) if a feature is only available from a certain Godot version, or if it is gated behind `experimental-godot-api`.

In the library, we got rid of two dependencies and reduced the "minimum codegen" set, which reduces compile times, especially in CI.
Lots of smaller refactorings have happened to keep the development process as smooth as possible.


## That's it for now!

We hope you enjoy the improvements since the [2024 review][dev-update-2024], and wish you great success in your projects! 
Whether those are games, plugins or other software, join our [Discord][discord] and let us know how you use the library in `#showcase`!

As always, the complete list of changes is available in the [changelog][changelog]. See also recently merged [pull requests][pull-requests].


[#650]: https://github.com/godot-rust/gdext/pull/650
[#1043]: https://github.com/godot-rust/gdext/pull/1043
[#1094]: https://github.com/godot-rust/gdext/pull/1094
[#1110]: https://github.com/godot-rust/gdext/pull/1110
[api-oneditor]: https://godot-rust.github.io/docs/gdext/master/godot/obj/struct.OnEditor.html
[book-signals]: https://godot-rust.github.io/book/register/signals.html
[changelog]: https://github.com/godot-rust/gdext/blob/master/Changelog.md#v030
[demo-projects]: https://github.com/godot-rust/demo-projects/
[dev-update-2024]: ../godot-rust-2024-review
[discord]: https://discord.gg/aKUCJ8rJsc
[issues]: https://github.com/godot-rust/gdext/issues
[pull-requests]: https://github.com/godot-rust/gdext/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Amerged

<br><br>

---

### Footnotes

[^gdscript-checks]: Arguments _may_ be checked by the receiving function (connected to the signal), depending on its signature, and only
  at runtime. However, the `signal` itself doesn't verify this. 
  See also the last _🛈 Note_ box [here](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/getting_started/step_by_step/signals.html#custom-signals).
